Conversion Between Option and Collection (#1983)
scala/docs.scala-lang: _overviews/collections-2.13/conversion-between-option-and-collection.md

---
layout: multipage-overview

> title: Conversion Between Option and Collection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Conversion Between Option and the Collections
```

partof: collections-213
overview-name: Collections

num: 18

> previous-page: conversion-between-java-and-scala-collections

Reviewer: Should we also set the `next-page` of the page `conversion-between-java-and-scala-collections`?

---
`Option` can be seen as a collection that has zero or exactly one element, and it provides a degree of interoperability with the collection types found in the package `scala.collection`. In particular, it implements the interface `IterableOnce`, which models the simplest form of collections: something that can be iterated over, at least once. However, `Option` does not implement the more comprehensive interface of `Iterable`. Indeed, we cannot provide a sensible implementation for the operation [`fromSpecific`](https://github.com/scala/scala/blob/6c68c2825e893bb71d6dc78465ac8c6f415cbd93/src/library/scala/collection/Iterable.scala#L173), which is supposed to create an `Option` from a collection of possibly more than one element. Starting from [Scala 2.13](https://github.com/scala/scala/pull/8038), `Option` was made an `IterableOnce` but not an `Iterable`.

Hence `Option` can be used everywhere an `IterableOnce` is expected, for example, when calling `flatMap` on a collection (or inside a for-comprehension)

```
scala> for {
     |   a <- Set(1)
     |   b <- Option(41)
     | } yield (a + b)
val res0: scala.collection.immutable.Set[Int] = Set(42)

> ``` 

Reviewer: Can we use mdoc to typecheck and compute the result of this snippet? I couldn’t find how to do that in README.md maybe another contributor can help us?

Reviewer 2: I was able to [process single markdown file](https://scalameta.org/mdoc/docs/installation.html#process-single-markdown-file) locally like so

```
coursier launch org.scalameta:mdoc_2.12:2.2.20 -- --in _overviews/collections-2.13/conversion-between-option-and-the-collections.md
```

This generates output markdown file with 

```scala
Some(42).drop(1)
// res1: Iterable[Int] = List()
```

Should I commit these outputs?

Reviewer: No, the output of mdoc should be automatically displayed on the rendered website. Did you try to run the website locally? https://github.com/scala/docs.scala-lang#quickstart

Reviewer 2: I tried running but mdoc evaluation does not show up. It seems currently even in production mdoc fences are not rendered evaluated, for example, see how [for-comprehensions.md](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/scala/docs.scala-lang/main/_tour/for-comprehensions.md) is rendered at https://docs.scala-lang.org/tour/for-comprehensions.html

Reviewer: Oh, good point, maybe they are just typechecked, but not rendered… Maybe there is a modifier to use to display the result?

Reviewer 2: It looks like they are only typechecked according to https://github.com/scala/docs.scala-lang/blob/main/contribute.md#code-blocks

Reviewer: Thanks for investigating! Then I think what we can do is to show the output as an (unchecked) comment:

~~~ scala
for {
  x <- Set(41)
  y <- Option(1)
} yield x + y
// : Set[Int] = Set(42)
~~~

Reviewer 2: Done. As a side note, seems because similar workarounds are used throughout docs to show outputs it would be hard to ever switch on automatic mdoc output rendering since it would effectively display duplicate outputs.

---
layout: multipage-overview
title: Conversion Between Option and Collection
partof: collections-213
overview-name: Collections

num: 18
previous-page: conversion-between-java-and-scala-collections

permalink: /overviews/collections-2.13/:title.html
---

> `Option` can be seen conceptually as a collection that has zero or exactly one element, and can be iterated once or more than one time. `Option` does provide a degree of interoperability with the collection types found in the package `scala.collection`, in particular, it implements the interface `IterableOnce`, which models the simplest form of collections. However `Option` is not a full collections in the sense of implementing the full `Iterable` interface, because although an iterator of zero to one elements exists for `Option`, we cannot provide a sensible implementation for [`fromSpecific`](https://github.com/scala/scala/blob/6c68c2825e893bb71d6dc78465ac8c6f415cbd93/src/library/scala/collection/Iterable.scala#L173) which turns one collection into another
> 
> 
> ```
> def fromSpecific(coll: IterableOnce[A]): C
> ```
> 
> For example if we attempted to defined it as `coll.headOption`, then we would throw away some elements when `coll` has more than one element. For this reason, starting [Scala 2.13](https://github.com/scala/scala/pull/8038), `Option` was made an `IterableOnce` but not an `Iterable`. To help clarify the difference between the two, mentally rename `Iterable` to `Collection` whilst `IterableOnce` becomes `Iterable`.
> 
> Hence `Option` can be used everywhere an `IterableOnce` is expected, for example, when calling `flatMap` on a collection (or inside a for-comprehension)

Reviewer: I would propose to go less into the technical details. I think what is important is to let the reader what is supported, but I don’t think we should explain much what it would entail to make `Option` implement `Iterable`. (Maybe others disagree?)
Also, I don’t think it helps to propose a mental model where `Iterable` is renamed to `Collection` and `IterableOnce` is renamed to `Iterable`.

```suggestion
`Option` can be seen as a collection that has zero or exactly one element, and it provides a degree of interoperability with the collection types found in the package `scala.collection`. In particular, it implements the interface `IterableOnce`, which models the simplest form of collections: something that can be iterated over, at least once. However, `Option` does not implement the more comprehensive interface of `Iterable`. Indeed, we cannot provide a sensible implementation for the operation [`fromSpecific`](https://github.com/scala/scala/blob/6c68c2825e893bb71d6dc78465ac8c6f415cbd93/src/library/scala/collection/Iterable.scala#L173), which is supposed to create an `Option` from a collection of possibly more than one element. Starting from [Scala 2.13](https://github.com/scala/scala/pull/8038), `Option` was made an `IterableOnce` but not an `Iterable`.

Hence `Option` can be used everywhere an `IterableOnce` is expected, for example, when calling `flatMap` on a collection (or inside a for-comprehension)
```

```
scala> for {
     |   a <- Set(1)
     |   b <- Option(41)
     | } yield (a + b)
val res0: scala.collection.immutable.Set[Int] = Set(42)
``` 

> since `Set#flatMap` takes function to `IterableOnce`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
since the operation `flatMap` on the type `Set[Int]` takes a function returning an `IterableOnce`:
```

```

> def flatMap[B](f: Int => scala.collection.IterableOnce[B]): scala.collection.immutable.Set[B]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
def flatMap[B](f: Int => IterableOnce[B]): Set[B]
```

```

> Having said `Option` is not a full collection in the sense of extending `Iterable`, nevertheless there exists an [implicit conversion](https://github.com/scala/scala/blob/6c68c2825e893bb71d6dc78465ac8c6f415cbd93/src/library/scala/Option.scala#L19) between an `Option` and `Iterable` (or `Collection` in our mental model)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although `Option` does not extend `Iterable`, there exists an [implicit conversion](https://github.com/scala/scala/blob/6c68c2825e893bb71d6dc78465ac8c6f415cbd93/src/library/scala/Option.scala#L19) between `Option` and `Iterable`
```

```
implicit def option2Iterable[A](xo: Option[A]): Iterable[A]
```

so although `Option[A]` is not a full collection it can be _viewed_ as one. For example,

```
scala> Some(42).drop(1)
val res0: Iterable[Int] = List()
```

expands to

```
scala> Option.option2Iterable(Some(42)).drop(1)
val res1: Iterable[Int] = List()
```

> because `drop` is not defined on `Option`. Downside of the above implicit conversion is that instead of getting back specific `Option[A]` we are left with more general `Iterable[A]`. For this reason `Option` scaladoc carries the following [note](https://github.com/scala/scala/blob/6c68c2825e893bb71d6dc78465ac8c6f415cbd93/src/library/scala/Option.scala#L124):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because `drop` is not defined on `Option`. A downside of the above implicit conversion is that instead of getting back an `Option[A]` we are left with an `Iterable[A]`. For this reason, `Option`’s documentation carries the following note:
```

Now although an iterator of zero to one elements exists for `Option`, we cannot define 

```
def fromSpecific(coll: IterableOnce[A]): C
```

since implementation of `coll.headOption` would throw away elements when `coll` has more than one element. For this reason, starting [Scala 2.13](https://github.com/scala/scala/pull/8038), `Option` was made an `IterableOnce` but not an `Iterable`. To help clarify the difference between the two, mentally rename `Iterable` to `Collection` whilst `IterableOnce` becomes `Iterable`. Thus `Option` is iterable but not a collection. 

One consequence of `Option` extending `IterableOnce` is that it can be [composed with other collections](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4719592/composing-option-with-list-in-for-comprehension-gives-type-mismatch-depending-on) inside for-comprehension, for example

```
scala> for {
     |   a <- Set(1)
     |   b <- Option(41)
     | } yield (a + b)
val res0: scala.collection.immutable.Set[Int] = Set(42)
``` 

since `Set#flatMap` takes function to `IterableOnce`

```
scala> Set(1).flatMap

> def flatMap[B](f: Int => scala.collection.IterableOnce[B]): scala.collection.immutable.Set[B]

Reviewer: This is not a valid Scala expression that users can copy-paste in a REPL, I think it is misleading to show it as such.

```

Having said `Option` is not a proper collection, there does exists an [implicit conversion](https://github.com/scala/scala/blob/6c68c2825e893bb71d6dc78465ac8c6f415cbd93/src/library/scala/Option.scala#L19) between an `Option` and `Iterable` (or `Collection` in our mental model)

```
implicit def option2Iterable[A](xo: Option[A]): Iterable[A]
```

so although `Option[A]` is not a collection it can be _viewed_ as one. For example,

```
scala> Some(42).drop(1)
val res0: Iterable[Int] = List()
```

expands to

```
scala> Option.option2Iterable(Some(42)).drop(1)
val res1: Iterable[Int] = List()
```

because `drop` is not defined on `Option`. Downside of the above implicit conversion is that instead of getting back specific `Option[A]` we are left with more general `Iterable[A]`. For this reason `Option` scaladoc carries the following [note](https://github.com/scala/scala/blob/6c68c2825e893bb71d6dc78465ac8c6f415cbd93/src/library/scala/Option.scala#L124):

> > Many of the methods in here (Option) are duplicative with those in the Traversable (Iterable) hierarchy, but they are duplicated for a reason: the implicit conversion tends to leave one with an Iterable in situations where one could have retained an Option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Many of the methods in `Option` are duplicative with those in the `Iterable` hierarchy, but they are duplicated for a reason: the implicit conversion tends to leave one with an `Iterable` in situations where one could have retained an `Option`.
```
